# Heart-rate-app
Pulse is commonly measured in beats per minute (BPM) and the pulse rate can be used to check overall heart health and fitness level. Generally a lower rate is better. 
The basal or resting heart rate (HRrest) is defined as the heart rate when a person is awake, in a neutrally temperate environment, and has not been subject to any recent exertion or stimulation (eg. stress or surprise). The American Heart Association states the normal resting adult human heart rate is 60-100 bpm. Resting heart rate is often correlated with mortality: all-cause mortality is increased by 1.22 when heart rate exceeds 90 beats per minute.
The maximum heart rate (HRmax) is the highest number of beats per minute of the heart when reaching a point of exhaustion through exercise stress. In general it is loosely estimated as 220 minus one's age, thus it generally decreases with age.
Heart rate reserve (HRreserve) is (HRmax -HRrest). As a person increases their cardiovascular fitness, their HRrest will decrease, and thus the heart rate reserve will increase. 
When I was working as a Certified Personal Trainer (CPT), going to school for a certification in Exercise Science, and also applying my interest in fitness to my own life , I discovered that various "standard units of time" can be employed to record ones pulse (in BPM), with longer durations generally yielding more accurate results (for example, you can record your pulse for 6 seconds and multiply the result by ten, record for 10 seconds and multiply by six, record for 30 seconds and multiply by two, or record for 60 seconds and multiply by one). However, regardless of the duration used to analyze ones' heart rate, it is crucial to meticulously track both the time and the pulse simultaneously. Even ONE falsely report beat or a beat unaccounted for can dramatically alter your results (especially when you're multiplying your outcome by 10 or 6). Unfortunately, tracking BOTH time and pulse can be especially difficult after very vigorous exercise. Furthermore, the time it takes to find a pulse AND watch the clock (often inconveniently located) can result in your heart rate becoming even more slowed (after vigorous exercise , for example) further skewing the representation of the results.
This realization sparked my desire to create a solution. Consequently, the objective at hand is to develop an application for a user to effortlessly calculate their heart rate (using BPM) regardless of the recording duration. The user's involvement is simplified to opening the app, locating their pulse (choosing the wrist makes this easiest) and then initiating the recording period by clicking the "start" button on the app. Once the clock is started, the user can conveniently click the "pulse" button each time they feel their pulse. They can do this for any period of time, from 6 seconds to 6 hours (hypothetically). However, when they feel the BPM has been well established for whatever period they were trying to assess they can click the "stop" button to stop the time (since pulse following strenuous cardiovascular exercise or immediately after waking up will gradually settle towards baseline - down and up respectively - results will be slightly skewed from too long or too short a recording period , regardless of method - ideally your recording period captures the window before your body returns to its baseline). By clicking the stop button, the recording time is will be promptly halted, enabling the accurate calculation of BPM based on the user's input.
As should be obvious, the formula for BPM (beats per minute) is (pulse รท minute). Thus, if "time" is recorded in seconds, this calculation for BPM could be simply programmed as 
(user_recorded_pulse รท (seconds_elapsed รท 60))
with seconds_elapsed further being equal to (user_stop_time - user_start_time)
By implementing this user-friendly application, individuals can effortlessly monitor their heart rate and gain valuable insights into their cardiovascular health and fitness. 
